[FLINK-13380][k8s] Improve the usability of Flink session cluster on Kubernetes (#9470)
apache/flink: docs/ops/deployment/kubernetes.md

Using the resource definitions for a [session cluster](#session-cluster-resource-definitions), launch the cluster with the `kubectl` command:

>     kubectl create -f configmap.yaml

Reviewer: maybe rename `configmap.yaml` into `cluster-configuration-configmap.yaml` or `flink-configuration-configmap.yaml`.

    kubectl create -f jobmanager-service.yaml
    kubectl create -f jobmanager-deployment.yaml
    kubectl create -f taskmanager-deployment.yaml

Note that you could define your own customized options of `flink-conf.yaml` within `configmap.yaml`.

You can then access the Flink UI via `kubectl proxy`:

1. Run `kubectl proxy` in a terminal
2. Navigate to [http://localhost:8001/api/v1/namespaces/default/services/flink-jobmanager:ui/proxy](http://localhost:8001/api/v1/namespaces/default/services/flink-jobmanager:ui/proxy) in your browser

> Another way to view the Flink UI is via [service with NodePort](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/access-application-cluster/service-access-application-cluster/#creating-a-service-for-an-application-running-in-two-pods) 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to view the Flink's web UI, it needs to be exposed via a Kubernetes service which exposes the port on the node's public ip. The service `flink-jobmanager-svc` achieves exactly this. Using this service, the web ui can be accessed via `http://<public-node-ip>:<node-port>`.
```

(which has been defined as `flink-jobmanager-svc` in our template) of address `http://<public-node-ip>:<node-port>`. 

> What's more，your could use command below to submit your jobs:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What's more, you could use the following command below to submit jobs to the cluster:
```

Using the resource definitions for a [session cluster](#session-cluster-resource-definitions), launch the cluster with the `kubectl` command:

    kubectl create -f flink-configuration-configmap.yaml
    kubectl create -f jobmanager-service.yaml
    kubectl create -f jobmanager-deployment.yaml
    kubectl create -f taskmanager-deployment.yaml

Note that you could define your own customized options of `flink-conf.yaml` within `flink-configuration-configmap.yaml`.

You can then access the Flink UI via different ways:
*  `kubectl proxy`:

    1. Run `kubectl proxy` in a terminal.
    2. Navigate to [http://localhost:8001/api/v1/namespaces/default/services/flink-jobmanager:ui/proxy](http://localhost:8001/api/v1/namespaces/default/services/flink-jobmanager:ui/proxy) in your browser.

*  `kubectl port-forward`:
    1. Run `kubectl port-forward ${flink-jobmanager-pod} 8081:8081` to forward your jobmanager's web ui port to local 8081.

>     2. Navigate to [http://localhost:8001](http://localhost:8001) in your browser.

Reviewer 2: Should be `localhost:8081` in this example.

Author: good catch.

      containers:
      - name: jobmanager
        image: flink:latest
        workingDir: /opt/flink
        command: ["/bin/bash", "-c", "$FLINK_HOME/bin/jobmanager.sh start;\
          while :;
          do
            if [[ -f $(find log -name '*jobmanager*.log' -print -quit) ]];
              then tail -f -n +1 log/*jobmanager*.log;
            fi;

>           done"]

Reviewer: Could this be part of the `entrypoint.sh`?

Author: IMO, there should be another issue to discuss about modifying the `entrypoint.sh`. Even I include this part as `entrypoint.sh`, since I already use `command` to start the container, the default `entrypoint.sh` would be useless for me.

Reviewer: Of course, one would have to use the entrypoint.sh then and not specify `command`. But I'm ok with discussing this as a separate issue and keeping it out of this PR's scope.

        ports:
        - containerPort: 6123
          name: rpc
        - containerPort: 6124
          name: blob
        - containerPort: 8081
          name: ui
        livenessProbe:
          tcpSocket:
            port: 6123
          initialDelaySeconds: 30
          periodSeconds: 60
        volumeMounts:
        - name: flink-config-volume
          mountPath: /opt/flink/conf
      volumes:

>       - name: flink-config-volume

Reviewer: Indentation seems to be wrong

Author: Actually, this is the right indentation. `containers` and `volumes` are both fields in [podspec](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/generated/kubernetes-api/v1.15/#podspec-v1-core).

Author: Actually, this is the right indentation. `containers` and `volumes` are both fields in [podspec](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/generated/kubernetes-api/v1.15/#podspec-v1-core).

      containers:
      - name: taskmanager
        image: flink:latest
        workingDir: /opt/flink
        command: ["/bin/bash", "-c", "$FLINK_HOME/bin/taskmanager.sh start; \
          while :;
          do
            if [[ -f $(find log -name '*taskmanager*.log' -print -quit) ]];
              then tail -f -n +1 log/*taskmanager*.log;
            fi;

>           done"]

Reviewer: Same here, by adding it to the `entrypoint.sh` one could remove a bit of code duplication.

Author: Since I already added `command` in deployment, the default `entrypoint.sh` [would be ignored](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/inject-data-application/define-command-argument-container/#notes).

metadata:
  name: flink-jobmanager
spec:
  type: ClusterIP
  ports:
  - name: rpc
    port: 6123
  - name: blob
    port: 6124
  - name: ui
    port: 8081
  selector:
    app: flink
    component: jobmanager
---
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:

>   name: flink-jobmanager-svc

Reviewer: dumb question, does `svc` stand for service? If yes, then we could maybe rename it into `flink-web-ui-service`.

Author: Actually, this service enables user could submit jobs via shell script to rest API, how about `flink-rest-service`?

spec:

>   type: NodePort

Reviewer 2: @Myasuka, do you really need to expose the service as a `NodePort`?
Shouldn't the above `ClusterIP` type `flink-jobmanager` service be enough for cluster to work properly?

Author: Yes, `ClusterIP` should be enough for the cluster to work properly. But without a `NodePort` on jobmanager's rest RPC port, I couldn't find a way to submit my application via `bin/flink run -m <k8s-flink-cluster>`. It seems I could only submit my application via web UI which is not so convenient for developers.

Reviewer 2: If your situation is in some test/development setup, you can try to:
 * run `kubectl port-forward ${flink-jobmanager-pod} 8081:8081` to make JM reachable from your local machine (where you run `bin/flink run -m ...`).
 * I don't know well the `bin/flink run -m ${endpoint}` functionality, but if it doesn't work with urls that have additional path, the script/program behind it could have been extended to support such endpoints (smt. like: `bin/flink -m "http://localhost:8081/api/v1/namespaces/default/services/flink-jobmanager:ui/proxy" ...`).

If the Kubernetes resources and the documentation here are served as some recommended/exemplar Flink cluster setup, then adding a service definition that exposes node port would be a bad example, imo.
I suggest to remove the new service definition and maybe just add some more options (in the documentation) how developers can make JM reachable outside of test K8s cluster.

Author: Okay, I think we might add a separate service yaml file in the documentation to represent the `rest service` and tell users different ways to submit jobs: via `kubectl port-forward` or via the nodeport of this rest service.

metadata:
  name: flink-jobmanager
spec:
  type: ClusterIP
  ports:
  - name: rpc
    port: 6123
  - name: blob
    port: 6124
  - name: ui
    port: 8081
  selector:
    app: flink
    component: jobmanager
{% endhighlight %}

> `jobmanager-rest-service.yaml`. Optional service, which is used to add a `NodePort` on the jobmanager rest service so that user could submit job via `<public-node-ip>:<node-port>`.

Reviewer 2: Can be rephrased to smt. like:
```
Optional service, that exposes the jobmanager `ui` port as public Kubernetes node's port.
```

But personally, I'd avoid adding this at all, as poor recommendation/guidance for users (as mentioned before).

Author: Use `NodePort` to expose an application from K8S cluster is a general solution from official doc. Why you think this should be avoided to add?

Reviewer 2: My reasoning, that there maybe two types of readers of this docs:
 * people like devs, who have a test K8s cluster and want to setup test/experimental Flink cluster. For this, I assume they can run `kubectl port-forward|proxy` and also create resources by `kubectl`. For them the existing means should be already enough to make Flink JM available from a local dev machine. Showing them method that exposes `NodePort` would be like giving a poor example;
 * people like ops, that operate production K8s cluster. In that case they are probably knowledgeable enough how to expose a service properly.

There are some blog posts in internet, for example [this one](https://medium.com/google-cloud/kubernetes-nodeport-vs-loadbalancer-vs-ingress-when-should-i-use-what-922f010849e0) that give some information what are the different ways and in which situations to make service available outside of K8s cluster.

Author: Why I want to tell users how to submit jobs is inspired from this [stackoverflow question](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/56910990/flink-on-kubernetes-how-to-submit-jobs-to-session-clusters). I think it's worthy to add this instruction to offer another choice.

Reviewer: I understand @1u0 concerns but I agree with @Myasuka that documenting the different ways might probably not hurt.
